style: apply /style-guide pass to models/sweeps (#2722)
wandb/docs: models/sweeps/local-controller.mdx

By default, W&B hosts the hyperparameter controller as a cloud service. W&B agents communicate with the controller to determine the next set of parameters to use for training. The controller also runs early stopping algorithms to determine which runs to stop.

The local controller feature lets you run search and stop algorithms locally.

<Warning>
This feature supports faster development and debugging of new algorithms for the Sweeps tool. It isn't intended for hyperparameter optimization workloads.
</Warning>

## Prerequisites

Install the W&B SDK (`wandb`) so that the local controller commands are available:

```bash
pip install wandb sweeps
```

The following examples assume you already have a configuration file and a training loop defined in a Python script or Jupyter notebook. For more information, see [Define sweep configuration](/models/sweeps/define-sweep-configuration).

## Run the local controller from the command line

> Initialize a sweep the same way you do when you use hyperparameter controllers hosted by W&B as a cloud service. Specify the controller flag (`controller`) to indicate that you want to use the local controller for sweep jobs:

Author: Fixed in fbe829847. The prose now refers to the `--controller` flag so it matches the `wandb sweep --controller config.yaml` command directly below it.

title: Manage algorithms locally
---

> This page shows you how to run a sweep's search and stopping algorithms locally instead of using the W&B cloud-hosted controller. Use the local controller when you want to inspect and instrument the code to debug issues or develop new algorithms that you can later incorporate into the cloud service.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This page shows you how to run a sweep's search and stopping algorithms locally instead of using the W&B cloud-hosted controller. Use the local controller to inspect and instrument the code to debug issues or develop new algorithms that you can later incorporate into the cloud service.
```
Is it a cloud service or a cloud controller?

Author: Applied your suggestion (dropped "when you want to"). On cloud service vs. controller: they're the same W&B-managed controller (offered as a cloud service). I made the reference consistent by changing "the cloud service" to "the cloud-hosted controller".

_🤖 Addressed by [Claude Code](https://claude.com/claude-code)_

By default, W&B hosts the hyperparameter controller as a cloud service. W&B agents communicate with the controller to determine the next set of parameters to use for training. The controller also runs early stopping algorithms to determine which runs to stop.

The local controller feature lets you run search and stop algorithms locally.

<Warning>

> This feature supports faster development and debugging of new algorithms for the Sweeps tool. It isn't intended for hyperparameter optimization workloads.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This feature supports faster development and debugging of new algorithms for the Sweeps tool. It isn't appropriate for hyperparameter optimization workloads.
```

Author: Applied your suggestion ("intended" → "appropriate").

_🤖 Addressed by [Claude Code](https://claude.com/claude-code)_

</Warning>

## Prerequisites

Install the W&B SDK (`wandb`) so that the local controller commands are available:

```bash
pip install wandb sweeps
```

The following examples assume you already have a configuration file and a training loop defined in a Python script or Jupyter notebook. For more information, see [Define sweep configuration](/models/sweeps/define-sweep-configuration).

> ## Run the local controller from the command line

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Run a local controller from the command line
```

Author: Applied your suggestion. No inbound links to this anchor, so the slug change is safe.

_🤖 Addressed by [Claude Code](https://claude.com/claude-code)_

> Initialize a sweep the same way you do when you use hyperparameter controllers hosted by W&B as a cloud service. Specify the `--controller` flag to indicate that you want to use the local controller for sweep jobs:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Initialize a sweep the same way as when you use hyperparameter controllers hosted by W&B as a cloud service, but pass the `--controller` flag to use the local controller:
```

Author: Applied your suggestion, folded into the new stepped procedure.

_🤖 Addressed by [Claude Code](https://claude.com/claude-code)_

```bash
wandb sweep --controller config.yaml
```

> Alternatively, you can initialize the sweep and specify the local controller in two steps.

Reviewer: Why?

Author: Clarified: the two-step form lets you put the controller in your config file so you don't need to pass `--controller` each time. I reworked the section into a numbered procedure and moved this alternative to the end with that reason stated.

_🤖 Addressed by [Claude Code](https://claude.com/claude-code)_

wandb sweep config.yaml
```

> `wandb sweep` generates a sweep ID. After you initialize the sweep, start a controller with `wandb controller`. Replace `[SWEEP-ID]` with the sweep ID that `wandb sweep` generated. You can pass the short sweep ID or include the entity and project as a path (`[ENTITY]/[PROJECT]/[SWEEP-ID]`):

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Make a note of the sweep ID. After you initialize the sweep, start a controller. In the following command, replace `[SWEEP-ID]` with the sweep ID. You can pass the short sweep ID alone or include the entity and project as a path (`[ENTITY]/[PROJECT]/[SWEEP-ID]`):
```

Author: Applied, folded into step 2 of the new stepped procedure.

_🤖 Addressed by [Claude Code](https://claude.com/claude-code)_

```bash
wandb controller [SWEEP-ID]
```

After you specify that you want to use a local controller, start one or more sweep agents to run the sweep, the same way you usually do. For more information, see [Start sweep agents](/models/sweeps/start-sweep-agents).

Replace `[SWEEP-ID]` with the sweep ID returned by `wandb sweep`:

```bash
wandb agent [SWEEP-ID]

> ```

Reviewer: I'm starting to think this should be a stepped procedure. Also, you don't need to say "the same way you usually do". The "For more information" should come after the command.

Author: Converted to a numbered procedure, removed "the same way you usually do", and moved the "For more information" link after the agent command in step 3.

_🤖 Addressed by [Claude Code](https://claude.com/claude-code)_

> ## Run a local controller with W&B Python SDK

Reviewer: Should this be tabbed between CLI and API instead of two H2s?

Author: I kept the two H2 sections rather than tabs. The CLI flow is a linear multi-step procedure, while the Python SDK section is a progression of three increasingly advanced snippets, so they aren't symmetric alternatives that tab cleanly. Happy to convert to tabs if you'd prefer — there are no inbound links to these anchors, so it's a safe follow-up.

_🤖 Addressed by [Claude Code](https://claude.com/claude-code)_

> The following code snippets demonstrate how to specify and use a local controller with the W&B Python SDK. Each example offers progressively more control over the controller loop, so you can choose the approach that matches how much you need to customize search and scheduling.

Reviewer: "control over the controller loop" seems redundant or something

Author: Reworded: dropped "over the controller loop".

_🤖 Addressed by [Claude Code](https://claude.com/claude-code)_

> The simplest way to use a controller with the Python SDK is to pass the sweep ID to the [`wandb.controller()`](/models/ref/python/functions/controller) method. Then, use the returned object's `run` method to start the sweep job:

Reviewer: "simplest" seems like editorializing. What about "default" or "basic" or something? Should these be H3s?

Author: Removed the "simplest" editorializing (now "To use a controller with the Python SDK, pass the sweep ID..."). I left the three examples as a prose progression rather than H3s since each is only a few lines, but happy to add H3s if you'd rather.

_🤖 Addressed by [Claude Code](https://claude.com/claude-code)_

wandb sweep config.yaml
```

> `wandb sweep` generates a sweep ID. After you initialize the sweep, start a controller with `wandb controller`. Replace `[USER]`, `[ENTITY]`, and `[SWEEP-ID]` with your W&B username, entity, and the generated sweep ID:

Author: Fixed in fbe829847. The `wandb controller` CLI takes a sweep ID (optionally `entity/project/sweep_id`), per the `wandb controller` CLI reference, so the `[USER]/[ENTITY]/[SWEEP-ID]` path was invalid. The instruction now tells you to replace `[SWEEP-ID]` and notes the optional `[ENTITY]/[PROJECT]/[SWEEP-ID]` path form.

```bash

> wandb controller [USER]/[ENTITY]/[SWEEP-ID]

Author: Fixed in fbe829847 — the command is now `wandb controller [SWEEP-ID]`, matching the CLI reference and the `wandb agent [SWEEP-ID]` example just below it.
